_pages/speaking.md, before:

---
title: "Speaking"
permalink: /speaking/
---
{% include toc %}

In addition to being a professor, I often give talks and workshops to college and university faculty on teaching and learning issues. My emphasis is on __providing research-based, yet practical help to college faculty on improving student learning, delivered with a lot of energy and a positive, student-centered attitude.__ My areas of emphasis include: 

+ Flipped learning and the flipped classroom
+ Standards-based and specifications grading 
+ Self-regulated learning 
+ Teaching with technology, including classroom response systems (clickers)

If you are in in higher education and are looking for someone to come and work with your faculty on improving teaching and learning in any of these areas --- or a combination of them, or something related to them --- I'd love to work with you. 

## Experience 

I've been giving talks and workshops on teaching and learning for about seven years. My experience includes: 

+ Two-day workshops on flipped learning to two-year college faculty in Michigan and Pennsylvania
+ All-day workshop on flipped learning to the entire faculty and staff of a small liberal arts college
+ A two-day minicourse on flipped learning design given to mathematics faculty at the 2015 MAA MathFest 
+ Keynote speaker and scholar-in-residence for the [Appalachian College Association](http://www.acaweb.org/) five-day Teaching and Learning Institute 
+ Keynote addresses in the United Kingdom, Jamaica, and Canada
+ Contributed papers at academic conferences 
+ I even gave a workshop on clickers once to the Johnson County (Indiana) Humane Society. (One of my favorite experiences.) 

## Examples 

Here's a talk I gave recently with my GVSU colleague Matt Boelkins on _How can technology extend the humanity of learners? A dialogue._

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zUn8F6Y1K-s?start=998" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

And here are some presentations from select past engagements: 

+ [Twenty-First Century Technology Serving Twenty-First Century Learners](http://rtalbert.org/uwi) University of the West Indies/Guardian Group Premium Teaching Open Lecture. (Kingston, Jamaica; October 8, 2015)
+ [Rethinking Class Time Using Accessible Technology](http://rtalbert.org/kcexpo) Keynote address, Kansas City Regional Mathematics Technology Expo. (Kansas City, MO; October 2, 2015)
+ [An ABC for Effective Flipped Learning](http://rtalbert.org/pearsontoronto) Keynote address, Innovation Insights in Quantitative Business. (Toronto, Ontario, Canada; May 25, 2015)
+ [Self-Regulated Learning in the Calculus Classroom](http://roberttalbert.github.io/advance) Workshop, Syracuse University Project Advance. (Syracuse and New York City, NY; May 4--5, 2015)
+ [Flipping the University Classroom: A Gateway to Lifelong Learning](http://roberttalbert.github.io/cardiffuniv) Keynote address, Workshop on Innovations in University Mathematics Teaching. (Cardiff, Wales UK; July 7, 2014)


## What you can expect 

Once your organization has retained me as a speaker or workshop facilitator, here is what you can expect from me: 

1. Prompt, professional, and transparent replies to all your emails and phone calls. 
2. A personal conversation with me prior to the event, to help me gauge your needs and interests.
3. Thorough preparation and quality materials, especially for workshops which will provide a number of “take-home” materials for participants.
4. Arrival on-site at least one hour before the talk or workshop, to be prepared and properly set up when the event begins.
5. For talks — an energetic, positive message tailored to the specific interests of your group. For workshops — a vigorous time of work (and fun!) with a clear purpose in mind, again tailored to the specific interests of your group.
6. A brief follow-up conversation following the event to make sure I met your expectations.
7. Continued accessibility to workshop participants through email and social media, in case participants have any remaining questions or ideas that didn’t get addressed on site. __I typically provide 30 days of free one-on-one consulting to all workshop participants__ following workshops. 


## How to hire me for speaking and workshops

Just email me at [talbertr@gvsu.edu](mailto:talbertr@gvsu.edu) and let me know the details of what you're interested in. The information that helps the most is: 

+ __What's the context?__ Is this event part of a larger event, like a conference or multiple-day retreat? Is there a specific issue you'd like me to address? Are there any details about your faculty and institution that would be helpful for me to know?
+ __What's the outcome?__ When the talk or workshop is done, what would you like to have accomplished? Where would you like your faculty to be, or what do you want them to know or be motivated to do, as a result of the event? 
+ __What's the location and what's the time frame?__ An exact date is most helpful but if it's pretty far off in the future, just a general time frame is OK. My current schedule for events is at the bottom of this page. 

## Fee structure 

When contracted to do a speaking or workshop engagement, my expectations for funding are: 

+ The host will pay for all __food, travel, and lodging__ expenses. For travel considerations, I am located near [Grand Rapids, Michigan USA](https://www.google.com/maps?ll=42.96125,-85.655719&q=42.96125,-85.655719&hl=en&t=m&z=12). For engagements within 300 miles of Grand Rapids, I typically rent a vehicle and drive. Otherwise I fly out of the [Gerald Ford International Airport](http://www.grr.org/) (GRR) and connect via the [Detroit Metropolitan Airport](http://www.metroairport.com/) (DTW) if necessary. 
+ I also request an __honorarium__ in addition to those expenses. How much is it? It depends on your needs, and on other factors that vary from one group to another. So, please contact me using the email or social media links in the sidebar if you're interested, and let's talk about it. 

<!-- My base charge for any speaking or workshop engagements consists of: 

+ __All food, travel, and lodging expenses are to be paid by the host.__ F
+ __If there are childcare expenses incurred, those are also to be paid by the host.__ (This is only for situations where I need to arrange childcare while gone, for example if the event falls during a school holiday.) 
+ An __honorarium__; see below. 

My base honorarium requests are as follows: 

| Type of event | Fee |
|:--------------|:--- |
| 45-minute keynote-style address | US$750 | 
| 3-hour workshop | US$1500 | 
| "Value pack" 45-minute keynote bundled with 3-hour workshop | US$2000 | 
| 6-hour workshop | US$2500 | 
 -->

## Upcoming speaking and workshop engagements 


| Engagement | Host | Location | Dates | 
| :----------| :--- | :------- | :---- | 
| Computational thinking in undergraduate discrete mathematics using Python and Jupyter notebooks | AMS/MAA Joint Meetings | Atlanta, GA | Jan 7, 2017 | 
| Making student learning visible with student-created video (_with Shelly Smith_) | AMS/MAA Joint Meetings | Atlanta, GA | Jan 8, 2017 | 
| Creating active learning environments in university mathematics courses with flipped learning (workshop) | St. Michael's College and MAA Northeastern Section | Colchester, VT | Feb 17, 2017  |
| Designing courses for significant flipped learning experiences (workshop) | St. Michael's College | Colchester, VT | Feb 18, 2017 |

Commit message:

Change email in speaker page

_pages/speaking.md, after:

---
title: "Speaking"
permalink: /speaking/
---
{% include toc %}

In addition to being a professor, I often give talks and workshops to college and university faculty on teaching and learning issues. My emphasis is on __providing research-based, yet practical help to college faculty on improving student learning, delivered with a lot of energy and a positive, student-centered attitude.__ My areas of emphasis include: 

+ Flipped learning and the flipped classroom
+ Standards-based and specifications grading 
+ Self-regulated learning 
+ Teaching with technology, including classroom response systems (clickers)

If you are in in higher education and are looking for someone to come and work with your faculty on improving teaching and learning in any of these areas --- or a combination of them, or something related to them --- I'd love to work with you. 

## Experience 

I've been giving talks and workshops on teaching and learning for about seven years. My experience includes: 

+ Two-day workshops on flipped learning to two-year college faculty in Michigan and Pennsylvania
+ All-day workshop on flipped learning to the entire faculty and staff of a small liberal arts college
+ A two-day minicourse on flipped learning design given to mathematics faculty at the 2015 MAA MathFest 
+ Keynote speaker and scholar-in-residence for the [Appalachian College Association](http://www.acaweb.org/) five-day Teaching and Learning Institute 
+ Keynote addresses in the United Kingdom, Jamaica, and Canada
+ Contributed papers at academic conferences 
+ I even gave a workshop on clickers once to the Johnson County (Indiana) Humane Society. (One of my favorite experiences.) 

## Examples 

Here's a talk I gave recently with my GVSU colleague Matt Boelkins on _How can technology extend the humanity of learners? A dialogue._

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zUn8F6Y1K-s?start=998" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

And here are some presentations from select past engagements: 

+ [Twenty-First Century Technology Serving Twenty-First Century Learners](http://rtalbert.org/uwi) University of the West Indies/Guardian Group Premium Teaching Open Lecture. (Kingston, Jamaica; October 8, 2015)
+ [Rethinking Class Time Using Accessible Technology](http://rtalbert.org/kcexpo) Keynote address, Kansas City Regional Mathematics Technology Expo. (Kansas City, MO; October 2, 2015)
+ [An ABC for Effective Flipped Learning](http://rtalbert.org/pearsontoronto) Keynote address, Innovation Insights in Quantitative Business. (Toronto, Ontario, Canada; May 25, 2015)
+ [Self-Regulated Learning in the Calculus Classroom](http://roberttalbert.github.io/advance) Workshop, Syracuse University Project Advance. (Syracuse and New York City, NY; May 4--5, 2015)
+ [Flipping the University Classroom: A Gateway to Lifelong Learning](http://roberttalbert.github.io/cardiffuniv) Keynote address, Workshop on Innovations in University Mathematics Teaching. (Cardiff, Wales UK; July 7, 2014)


## What you can expect 

Once your organization has retained me as a speaker or workshop facilitator, here is what you can expect from me: 

1. Prompt, professional, and transparent replies to all your emails and phone calls. 
2. A personal conversation with me prior to the event, to help me gauge your needs and interests.
3. Thorough preparation and quality materials, especially for workshops which will provide a number of “take-home” materials for participants.
4. Arrival on-site at least one hour before the talk or workshop, to be prepared and properly set up when the event begins.
5. For talks — an energetic, positive message tailored to the specific interests of your group. For workshops — a vigorous time of work (and fun!) with a clear purpose in mind, again tailored to the specific interests of your group.
6. A brief follow-up conversation following the event to make sure I met your expectations.
7. Continued accessibility to workshop participants through email and social media, in case participants have any remaining questions or ideas that didn’t get addressed on site. __I typically provide 30 days of free one-on-one consulting to all workshop participants__ following workshops. 


## How to hire me for speaking and workshops

Just contact me using one of the links in the sidebar and let me know the details of what you're interested in. The information that helps the most is: 

+ __What's the context?__ Is this event part of a larger event, like a conference or multiple-day retreat? Is there a specific issue you'd like me to address? Are there any details about your faculty and institution that would be helpful for me to know?
+ __What's the outcome?__ When the talk or workshop is done, what would you like to have accomplished? Where would you like your faculty to be, or what do you want them to know or be motivated to do, as a result of the event? 
+ __What's the location and what's the time frame?__ An exact date is most helpful but if it's pretty far off in the future, just a general time frame is OK. My current schedule for events is at the bottom of this page. 

## Fee structure 

When contracted to do a speaking or workshop engagement, my expectations for funding are: 

+ The host will pay for all __food, travel, and lodging__ expenses. For travel considerations, I am located near [Grand Rapids, Michigan USA](https://www.google.com/maps?ll=42.96125,-85.655719&q=42.96125,-85.655719&hl=en&t=m&z=12). For engagements within 300 miles of Grand Rapids, I typically rent a vehicle and drive. Otherwise I fly out of the [Gerald Ford International Airport](http://www.grr.org/) (GRR) and connect via the [Detroit Metropolitan Airport](http://www.metroairport.com/) (DTW) if necessary. 
+ I also request an __honorarium__ in addition to those expenses. How much is it? It depends on your needs, and on other factors that vary from one group to another. So, please contact me using the email or social media links in the sidebar if you're interested, and let's talk about it. 

<!-- My base charge for any speaking or workshop engagements consists of: 

+ __All food, travel, and lodging expenses are to be paid by the host.__ F
+ __If there are childcare expenses incurred, those are also to be paid by the host.__ (This is only for situations where I need to arrange childcare while gone, for example if the event falls during a school holiday.) 
+ An __honorarium__; see below. 

My base honorarium requests are as follows: 

| Type of event | Fee |
|:--------------|:--- |
| 45-minute keynote-style address | US$750 | 
| 3-hour workshop | US$1500 | 
| "Value pack" 45-minute keynote bundled with 3-hour workshop | US$2000 | 
| 6-hour workshop | US$2500 | 
 -->

## Upcoming speaking and workshop engagements 


| Engagement | Host | Location | Dates | 
| :----------| :--- | :------- | :---- | 
| Computational thinking in undergraduate discrete mathematics using Python and Jupyter notebooks | AMS/MAA Joint Meetings | Atlanta, GA | Jan 7, 2017 | 
| Making student learning visible with student-created video (_with Shelly Smith_) | AMS/MAA Joint Meetings | Atlanta, GA | Jan 8, 2017 | 
| Creating active learning environments in university mathematics courses with flipped learning (workshop) | St. Michael's College and MAA Northeastern Section | Colchester, VT | Feb 17, 2017  |
| Designing courses for significant flipped learning experiences (workshop) | St. Michael's College | Colchester, VT | Feb 18, 2017 |
