speaking/speaking.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Speaking
permalink: /speaking/
---

In addition to my duties as a professor, I serve as a speaker and consultant to a variety of audiences on teaching and learning, especially university mathematics education, the flipped classroom, and the integration of technology in mathematics teaching and learning. My experiences range from small-group intensive workshops with high school calculus teachers and two-year college STEM faculty, to international keynote presentations and webinars. 

[Click here for more information on retaining me as a speaker](/speakinginfo) at your upcoming conference or event, or as a consultant for your faculty. 

<!-- ### Upcoming speaking/consulting engagements  -->
 
### Recent speaking/consulting engagements

+ [Twenty-First Century Technology Serving Twenty-First Century Learners](http://rtalbert.org/uwi) (Keynote and workshop; University of the West Indies, Kingston, Jamaica, October 8, 2015)
+ [Crafting a Sustainable Career through Better Teaching](http://rtalbert.org/monext) (Address to Missouri Project NExT; October 3, 2015, Kansas City, MO )
+ [Rethinking Class Time Using Accessible Technology](http://rtalbert.org/kcexpo) (Keynote, Kansas City Regional Mathematics Technology Expo; October 2, 2015, Kansas City, MO)
+ __Assessment Strategies for Flipped Learning Experinces__ (Webinar for Magna Publications; September 29, 2015)
+ [Creating Flipped Learning Experiences in the College Mathematics Classroom](http://www.maa.org/meetings/mathfest/program-details/2015/minicourses) (Minicourse, MAA MathFest; August 6 and 8, 2015, Washington DC)
+ [Implementing and Assessing Flipped Learning in Face-to-Face and Online Contexts](http://rtalbert.org/hlwhope) (Keynote, Hope College Hybrid Learning Workshop; June 8, 2015, Holland MI)
+ [Flipped Infrastructures for Inquiry-Based Learning](http://rtalbert.org/rlmoore) (Contibuted talk, 18th Annual Legacy of R. L. Moore/Inquiry Based Learning conference; June 25, 2015, Austin, TX)
+ [An ABC for Effective Flipped Learning](http://rtalbert.org/pearsontoronto) (Keynote, Innovation Insights in Quantitative Business; May 25, 2015, Toronto, ON CA)
+ [Self-Regulated Learning in the Calculus Classroom](http://roberttalbert.github.io/advance) (Workshop, Syracuse University Project Advance; May 4--5, 2015, Syracuse and New York City, NY)
+ [Best Practices in Flipped Class Design](http://www.magnapubs.com/online-seminars/best-practices-in-flipped-class-design-13377-1.html) (Webinar, Magna Publications; March 26, 2015)
+ [Students at the Center: The Why and the How of Student-Centered, Inquiry-Focused Instruction](http://roberttalbert.github.io/lenoirrhyne) (Keynote, Lenoir-Rhyne University faculty retreat; January 9, 2015, Hickory, NC)
+ [Exploring the Flipped Learning Model](http://roberttalbert.github.io/wlu) (Workshop, Wilfrid Laurier University; December 12, 2014, Waterloo, ON CA)
+ [Re:Designing Class for Flipped Learning Experiences](http://roberttalbert.github.io/calpoly) (Invited talk, California Polytechnic University; October 17, 2014, San Luis Obispo, CA)
+ [Formative Pre-Assessment in a Flipped Mathematics Class using Online Tools](http://roberttalbert.github.io/leeds) (Invited talk, Leeds University; September 16, 2014, Leeds, UK)
+ [Flipping the University Classroom: A Gateway to Lifelong Learning](http://roberttalbert.github.io/cardiffuniv) (Keynote, Workshop on Innovations in University Mathematics Teaching; July 7, 2014, Cardiff, UK)

Commit message:

Updated speaking, writing, and teaching pages

speaking/speaking.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Speaking
permalink: /speaking/
---

In addition to my duties as a professor, I serve as a speaker and consultant to a variety of audiences on teaching and learning, especially university mathematics education, the flipped classroom, and the integration of technology in mathematics teaching and learning. My experiences range from small-group intensive workshops with high school calculus teachers and two-year college STEM faculty, to international keynote presentations and webinars. 

[Click here for more information on retaining me as a speaker](/speakinginfo) at your upcoming conference or event, or as a consultant for your faculty. 

### Upcoming speaking/consulting engagements 
 
+ _How can technology extend the humanity of learners? A dialogue._ With Matt Boelkins. Keynote address, Grand Valley State University Teaching with Technology Symposium, Allendale, MI, March 23, 2015. 

### Recent speaking/consulting engagements

+ [Twenty-First Century Technology Serving Twenty-First Century Learners](http://rtalbert.org/uwi) (Keynote and workshop; University of the West Indies, Kingston, Jamaica, October 8, 2015)
+ [Crafting a Sustainable Career through Better Teaching](http://rtalbert.org/monext) (Address to Missouri Project NExT; October 3, 2015, Kansas City, MO )
+ [Rethinking Class Time Using Accessible Technology](http://rtalbert.org/kcexpo) (Keynote, Kansas City Regional Mathematics Technology Expo; October 2, 2015, Kansas City, MO)
+ __Assessment Strategies for Flipped Learning Experinces__ (Webinar for Magna Publications; September 29, 2015)
+ [Creating Flipped Learning Experiences in the College Mathematics Classroom](http://www.maa.org/meetings/mathfest/program-details/2015/minicourses) (Minicourse, MAA MathFest; August 6 and 8, 2015, Washington DC)
+ [Implementing and Assessing Flipped Learning in Face-to-Face and Online Contexts](http://rtalbert.org/hlwhope) (Keynote, Hope College Hybrid Learning Workshop; June 8, 2015, Holland MI)
+ [Flipped Infrastructures for Inquiry-Based Learning](http://rtalbert.org/rlmoore) (Contibuted talk, 18th Annual Legacy of R. L. Moore/Inquiry Based Learning conference; June 25, 2015, Austin, TX)
+ [An ABC for Effective Flipped Learning](http://rtalbert.org/pearsontoronto) (Keynote, Innovation Insights in Quantitative Business; May 25, 2015, Toronto, ON CA)
+ [Self-Regulated Learning in the Calculus Classroom](http://roberttalbert.github.io/advance) (Workshop, Syracuse University Project Advance; May 4--5, 2015, Syracuse and New York City, NY)
+ [Best Practices in Flipped Class Design](http://www.magnapubs.com/online-seminars/best-practices-in-flipped-class-design-13377-1.html) (Webinar, Magna Publications; March 26, 2015)
+ [Students at the Center: The Why and the How of Student-Centered, Inquiry-Focused Instruction](http://roberttalbert.github.io/lenoirrhyne) (Keynote, Lenoir-Rhyne University faculty retreat; January 9, 2015, Hickory, NC)
+ [Exploring the Flipped Learning Model](http://roberttalbert.github.io/wlu) (Workshop, Wilfrid Laurier University; December 12, 2014, Waterloo, ON CA)
+ [Re:Designing Class for Flipped Learning Experiences](http://roberttalbert.github.io/calpoly) (Invited talk, California Polytechnic University; October 17, 2014, San Luis Obispo, CA)
+ [Formative Pre-Assessment in a Flipped Mathematics Class using Online Tools](http://roberttalbert.github.io/leeds) (Invited talk, Leeds University; September 16, 2014, Leeds, UK)
+ [Flipping the University Classroom: A Gateway to Lifelong Learning](http://roberttalbert.github.io/cardiffuniv) (Keynote, Workshop on Innovations in University Mathematics Teaching; July 7, 2014, Cardiff, UK)
