about.md, before:

---
title: About
layout: page
permalink: /about/index.html
---
![Profile Image]({{ site.url }}/{{ site.picture }})

I'm Robert Talbert, and I am an Associate Professor in the Mathematics Department at [Grand Valley State University](http://www.gvsu.edu) in Allendale, Michigan USA. 

As a professor, I teach courses mainly for computer scientists (discrete structures, linear algebra, cryptography) and I also teach our department's online Calculus course in the summers. My current and upcoming classes are: 

+ __Spring/Summer 2016:__ MTH 201 (Calculus), Section 02 (online)
+ __Fall 2016:__ MTH 225 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1), Sections 01 and 02; MTH 325 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2), Section 01
+ __Winter 2017:__ MTH 225 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1), Section 03; MTH 325 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2), Sections 02 and 03

I do research primarily in the scholarship of teaching and learning, focusing on flipped learning, alternative grading practices, and teaching with technology. For a comprehensive list of my publications, [please see my _curriculum vitae_](/assets/TalbertCV-2016a.pdf) [PDF]. 

I'm the author of _Flipped Learning in the University: A User's Guide_, coming from Stylus Publishing in 2017. 

You can read more of what I'm thinking about, at my blog [Casting Out Nines](http://rtalbert.org/blog). 

I live in Allendale, 20 minutes from Grand Rapids and 20 minutes from the beaches of Lake Michigan with my wife, three kids and three cats. 


## Upcoming speaking and workshop engagements 

For information about how to hire me for speaking or workshop engagements, [please see my Speaking page](http://rtalbert.org/speaking). 


| Engagement | Host | Location | Dates | 
| :----------| :--- | :------- | :---- | 
| Keynote address: "The self-regulated life" | California Polytechnic University | Pomona, CA | June 13, 2016 | 
| Workshop: "Flipped learning: A gateway to self-regulated learning" | California Polytechnic University | Pomona, CA | June 13, 2016 | 


## Biographical sketch 

Robert Talbert is an Associate Professor in the Mathematics Department at [Grand Valley State University](http://www.gvsu.edu) in Allendale, Michigan. He earned a PhD. in Mathematics from Vanderbilt University in 1997 in algebraic topology and category theory under the direction of Efstratios Prassidis. Prior to joining the GVSU faculty in 2011, he was on the faculty at Franklin College from 2001--2011 and Bethel College (Indiana) from 1997--2001. 

Robert is an internationally recognized writer, speaker, and workshop facilitator in teaching and learning issues, with special emphases in flipped learning, alternative grading practices, and teaching with technology. He has delivered addresses and led workshops at colleges and universities in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, France, and Jamaica. He has authored or co-authored several research articles on teaching and learning, and he writes on issues involving teaching, learning, mathematics, technology, and higher education at his blog [Casting Out Nines](http://rtalbert.org/blog). His first book, _Flipped Learning in the University: A Users' Guide_ will be published by [Stylus Publishing](https://styluspub.presswarehouse.com/Books/Features.aspx) in 2017. 

While a graduate student at Vanderbilt, Robert received the B.F. Bryant Prize for Excellence in Teaching and the Outstanding Teaching Assistant Award. At GVSU, he received the [Pew Teaching with Technology Award](https://www.gvsu.edu/ftlc/pew-teaching-with-technology-award-60.htm) and was GVSU's nominee for Michigan Distinguished Professor of the Year in 2015. Also in 2015, Robert received the Distinguished Educator and Service Award from the [American Society for Engineering Education](http://www.asee.org) Mathematics Division.

Here is a short video made by GVSU upon Robert's receipt of the Pew Teaching with Technology Award: 

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0xMX0XpagGQ" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Robert lives in Allendale, Michigan with his wife, three young children, and three cats. He enjoys cooking, reading, bicycling, and soccer (watching, not playing). You can follow Robert [on Twitter](http://twitter.com/RobertTalbert) and other social media outlets.

Commit message:

Add line about speaker page

about.md, after:

---
title: About
layout: page
permalink: /about/index.html
---
![Profile Image]({{ site.url }}/{{ site.picture }})

__For information on my speaking and consulting, please go to [my Speaker page](http://rtalbert.org/speaking).__

I'm Robert Talbert, and I am an Associate Professor in the Mathematics Department at [Grand Valley State University](http://www.gvsu.edu) in Allendale, Michigan USA. 

As a professor, I teach courses mainly for computer scientists (discrete structures, linear algebra, cryptography) and I also teach our department's online Calculus course in the summers. My current and upcoming classes are: 

+ __Spring/Summer 2016:__ MTH 201 (Calculus), Section 02 (online)
+ __Fall 2016:__ MTH 225 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1), Sections 01 and 02; MTH 325 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2), Section 01
+ __Winter 2017:__ MTH 225 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1), Section 03; MTH 325 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2), Sections 02 and 03

I do research primarily in the scholarship of teaching and learning, focusing on flipped learning, alternative grading practices, and teaching with technology. For a comprehensive list of my publications, [please see my _curriculum vitae_](/assets/TalbertCV-2016a.pdf) [PDF]. 

I'm the author of _Flipped Learning in the University: A User's Guide_, coming from Stylus Publishing in 2017. 

You can read more of what I'm thinking about, at my blog [Casting Out Nines](http://rtalbert.org/blog). 

I live in Allendale, 20 minutes from Grand Rapids and 20 minutes from the beaches of Lake Michigan with my wife, three kids and three cats. 


## Upcoming speaking and workshop engagements 

For information about how to hire me for speaking or workshop engagements, [please see my Speaking page](http://rtalbert.org/speaking). 


| Engagement | Host | Location | Dates | 
| :----------| :--- | :------- | :---- | 
| Keynote address: "The self-regulated life" | California Polytechnic University | Pomona, CA | June 13, 2016 | 
| Workshop: "Flipped learning: A gateway to self-regulated learning" | California Polytechnic University | Pomona, CA | June 13, 2016 | 


## Biographical sketch 

Robert Talbert is an Associate Professor in the Mathematics Department at [Grand Valley State University](http://www.gvsu.edu) in Allendale, Michigan. He earned a PhD. in Mathematics from Vanderbilt University in 1997 in algebraic topology and category theory under the direction of Efstratios Prassidis. Prior to joining the GVSU faculty in 2011, he was on the faculty at Franklin College from 2001--2011 and Bethel College (Indiana) from 1997--2001. 

Robert is an internationally recognized writer, speaker, and workshop facilitator in teaching and learning issues, with special emphases in flipped learning, alternative grading practices, and teaching with technology. He has delivered addresses and led workshops at colleges and universities in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, France, and Jamaica. He has authored or co-authored several research articles on teaching and learning, and he writes on issues involving teaching, learning, mathematics, technology, and higher education at his blog [Casting Out Nines](http://rtalbert.org/blog). His first book, _Flipped Learning in the University: A Users' Guide_ will be published by [Stylus Publishing](https://styluspub.presswarehouse.com/Books/Features.aspx) in 2017. 

While a graduate student at Vanderbilt, Robert received the B.F. Bryant Prize for Excellence in Teaching and the Outstanding Teaching Assistant Award. At GVSU, he received the [Pew Teaching with Technology Award](https://www.gvsu.edu/ftlc/pew-teaching-with-technology-award-60.htm) and was GVSU's nominee for Michigan Distinguished Professor of the Year in 2015. Also in 2015, Robert received the Distinguished Educator and Service Award from the [American Society for Engineering Education](http://www.asee.org) Mathematics Division.

Here is a short video made by GVSU upon Robert's receipt of the Pew Teaching with Technology Award: 

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0xMX0XpagGQ" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Robert lives in Allendale, Michigan with his wife, three young children, and three cats. He enjoys cooking, reading, bicycling, and soccer (watching, not playing). You can follow Robert [on Twitter](http://twitter.com/RobertTalbert) and other social media outlets.
