speakinginfo/index.md, before:

---
layout: page
permalink: /speakinginfo/
---

My experiences with speaking and consulting have centered on __flipped learning and the flipped classroom__, __self-regulated learning in university STEM courses__, and the __integration of technology in teaching__. My past experiences include day-long workshops on the flipped classroom with STEM faculty at a two-year college; aculty retreats with 100+ faculty members; professional development sessions with high school mathematics teachers; training sessions for the use of classroom response systems ("clickers"); webinars; and keynote addresses in the US, Canada, and the UK. All of these experiences have been centered on providing __constructive, practical help with a positive attitude to education professionals who seek to improve student learning through student-centered pedagogies__. 

To inquire about having me work with your faculty or other group, please contact me using one of the links at the bottom of this page. My calendar of all upcoming engagements is on [the main Speaking page](/speaking) for your reference. 

### What you can expect

Once your organization has retained me as a speaker or workshop facilitator, here is what you can expect from me: 

1. Prompt, professional, and transparent replies to all your emails and phone calls. I understand that good workshops and talks are built on good relationships and mutual trust — which are based on good communication.
2. A personal phone conversation with me prior to the event, to help me gauge your needs and interests.
3. Thorough preparation and quality materials, especially for workshops which will provide a number of “take-home” materials for participants.
4. Arrival on-site at least one hour before the talk or workshop, to be prepared and properly set up when the event begins.
5. For talks — an energetic, positive message tailored to the specific interests of your group. For workshops — a vigorous time of work (and fun!) with a clear purpose in mind, again tailored to the specific interests of your group.
6. A brief follow-up conversation following the event to make sure I met your expectations.
7. Continued accessibility to workshop participants through email and social media, in case participants have any remaining questions or ideas that didn’t get addressed on site. I typically provide __30 days of free one-on-one consulting to all workshop participants__ following intensive workshops. 

### Fee structure

The base remuneration package that I request for all speaking and consulting enagements consists of __all food, travel, and lodging expenses to be paid by the host, in addition to an honorarium__. The honorarium amount depends on several factors: the length of the event, the amount of time required away from home, whether the engagement requires significant new research and preparation, and so on. Once we have made initial contact through email, I would be happy to discuss the amount of the honorarium in the context of the event and your budget. 

For travel considerations, I am located near [Grand Rapids, Michigan USA](https://www.google.com/maps?ll=42.96125,-85.655719&q=42.96125,-85.655719&hl=en&t=m&z=12). For engagements within [300 miles of Grand Rapids](http://www.freemaptools.com/radius-around-point.htm?clat=42.9633599&clng=-85.66808630000003&r=482.8032001844076&lc=FFFFFF&lw=1&fc=00FF00&fs=true), I typically rent a vehicle and drive. Otherwise I fly out of the [Gerald Ford International Airport](http://www.grr.org/) (GRR) and connect via the [Detroit Metropolitan Airport](http://www.metroairport.com/) (DTW) if necessary.

Commit message:

Added childcare expenses to speaking page

speakinginfo/index.md, after:

---
layout: page
permalink: /speakinginfo/
---

My experiences with speaking and consulting have centered on __flipped learning and the flipped classroom__, __self-regulated learning in university STEM courses__, and the __integration of technology in teaching__. My past experiences include day-long workshops on the flipped classroom with STEM faculty at a two-year college; aculty retreats with 100+ faculty members; professional development sessions with high school mathematics teachers; training sessions for the use of classroom response systems ("clickers"); webinars; and keynote addresses in the US, Canada, and the UK. All of these experiences have been centered on providing __constructive, practical help with a positive attitude to education professionals who seek to improve student learning through student-centered pedagogies__. 

To inquire about having me work with your faculty or other group, please contact me using one of the links at the bottom of this page. My calendar of all upcoming engagements is on [the main Speaking page](/speaking) for your reference. 

### What you can expect

Once your organization has retained me as a speaker or workshop facilitator, here is what you can expect from me: 

1. Prompt, professional, and transparent replies to all your emails and phone calls. I understand that good workshops and talks are built on good relationships and mutual trust — which are based on good communication.
2. A personal phone conversation with me prior to the event, to help me gauge your needs and interests.
3. Thorough preparation and quality materials, especially for workshops which will provide a number of “take-home” materials for participants.
4. Arrival on-site at least one hour before the talk or workshop, to be prepared and properly set up when the event begins.
5. For talks — an energetic, positive message tailored to the specific interests of your group. For workshops — a vigorous time of work (and fun!) with a clear purpose in mind, again tailored to the specific interests of your group.
6. A brief follow-up conversation following the event to make sure I met your expectations.
7. Continued accessibility to workshop participants through email and social media, in case participants have any remaining questions or ideas that didn’t get addressed on site. I typically provide __30 days of free one-on-one consulting to all workshop participants__ following intensive workshops. 

### Fee structure

The base remuneration package that I request for all speaking and consulting enagements consists of __all food, travel, lodging, and childcare expenses to be paid by the host, in addition to an honorarium__. (I do not bring my kids with me typically; but I often need to arrange childcare for them when I am gone.) The honorarium amount depends on several factors: the length of the event, the amount of time required away from home, whether the engagement requires significant new research and preparation, and so on. Once we have made initial contact through email, I would be happy to discuss the amount of the honorarium in the context of the event and your budget. 

For travel considerations, I am located near [Grand Rapids, Michigan USA](https://www.google.com/maps?ll=42.96125,-85.655719&q=42.96125,-85.655719&hl=en&t=m&z=12). For engagements within [300 miles of Grand Rapids](http://www.freemaptools.com/radius-around-point.htm?clat=42.9633599&clng=-85.66808630000003&r=482.8032001844076&lc=FFFFFF&lw=1&fc=00FF00&fs=true), I typically rent a vehicle and drive. Otherwise I fly out of the [Gerald Ford International Airport](http://www.grr.org/) (GRR) and connect via the [Detroit Metropolitan Airport](http://www.metroairport.com/) (DTW) if necessary.
