---
layout: post
title:  "What I learned this week"
date:   2015-09-25 14:01:28   
author: Robert Talbert
tags: 	"review"
---
It's Friday, so today's post (day 5 in the blog every weekday for a month challenge) will be a review of what I think I learned this week. At least, these are the things that have stuck with me, or a subset of it. 

1. __It really is possible to put up a blog post every day for a week.__ I took this "blog every weekday for a month" (BEWFAM?) challenge because I was sad that I often go 3, 4, or 5 weeks or longer between posts sometimes. _Why do I do that?_ I began to wonder. _I write in a journal every day, so why can't I post on the blog every day?_ This week as I've done this, the trick it seems is to write here as I would in my journal: Latch onto something that happens to come to mind, then do a writing sprint about it and don't worry so much about editing or polishing or whatever. So far so good. It will be harder next week. 
2. __My current pace of professional activity is too high.__ Starting next week is a two-week period during which I will be giving two keynote addresses at conferences, two faculty workshops, a webinar, a smaller talk (to the Missouri NExT people), and a sit-down with the faculty in a math department to talk about teaching and technology. Two weeks. And, it's in four different locations, one of which is not in this country. I was good this time and started putting all this stuff together a month ago, and even with that headstart I am still very much under the gun to get everything _else_ done. It's too much. I chose to do it all, but I now know what "too much" looks and feels like. 
3. __Sometimes putting boundaries and restrictions on things creates energy.__ I'm thinking of meetings here. As if I didn't have enough going on already I am the chair of two committees this year. One of those met for the first time this week and I made out not only an agenda for it but also a schedule with 10-minute time slots to discuss each item. One of the committee members remarked he'd never seen anyone break down the agenda in this way. I replied that if I didn't restrict myself time-wise, I'd go over; but if I do restrict myself, I often end up finishing early. The more I thought about that the more I think this is true generally. Place boundaries around what you're doing and it tends to focus you, to light a fire under you. 
4. __I'm very interested in seeing where tablet and cloud-based computing goes in the next 3--5 years.__ Our department bought some Chromebooks over the summer to use to loan out to students who don't have laptops during class. In August I took one of them home to configure it and get to know the OS, and my family and I ended up loving it. Yesterday, as my "vintage" 2011 Macbook Pro took 5 full minutes to open up Keynote, I got to thinking -- _how much of my work can I actually get done just using a Chromebook_? The answer right now is, not all of it; I still need [Camtasia](https://www.techsmith.com/camtasia.html) for example which has no obvious cloud-based analogue. But the answer is a lot closer to 100% than it used to be: [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/) for text and markdown editing; [SageMath Cloud](http://cloud.sagemath.com) for computation and LaTeX work; Google Docs for basic office stuff; and most of my productivity apps like [ToDoist](http://www.todoist.com) run in a browser. In a few more years the gap might be completely closed. I'd certainly like to get a new $500 Chromebook every year rather than get a new $2000 Macbook every four years just in terms of staying current. 
5. __West Michigan is beautiful in the fall.__ I didn't exactly "learn" this because I've lived here for four years, but you get reintroduced to this fact pretty much every year in the last week of September. I need to enjoy it, because I'll probably be shoveling snow in three weeks' time. 

So, what did _you_ learn this week? 
